Please describe your motivation, academic preparation and aptitude for graduate study at UC Davis. You should describe your academic plans and research interests, your specialization within your academic field, your research experiences and your career goals. You may consider how your past experiences and the opportunities you recognize at UC Davis (i.e. specific faculty and resources) will converge in the work you anticipate doing for the degree.

Describe yr motivation, academic preparation and aptitude for graduate study

You should describe your academic plans and research interests, your specialisation within your academic field, your research experiences and your career goals. You may consider how your past experiences and the opportunities you recognize at UC Davis (i.e. specific faculty and resources) will converge in the work you anticipate doing for the degree.

Why you want to do ms? Why are you ready for masters?  What are your research interest, (what have you done in this field), what is your career goal. How can the university help?

I was not a topper in my college, but surely was one of the richest students around in college. Richest, not financially but experience wise. In sophomore year, when most of the students were starting to learn basics of data structures, I was freelancing and making android apps for startups. In junior year, I was teaching algorithms and data structures at an education firm named Coding blocks and later in the same year I qualified for GSOC. These endeavors not only helped me earn money, but made me the ‘richest’ in terms of the skills and experience I gained and the qualities I imbibed, giving me a clear picture how I wanted to drive myself further.   From childhood days, mathematics has been my favorite subject, it attracted me because there is nothing to be memorized. Everything in mathematics is simply based on logic and if I were to forget some formula, then it could be simply derived using my previous knowledge. Thereafter I was introduced to programing as a fresher in college. Programming is similar to mathematics, here too we first solve different small problems and then combine them to solve the original bigger problem. I still clearly remember my first programming class, when our professor started the class with a question. He asked us to tell the hundredth prime number within 5 minutes. After everyone failed, he simply wrote a few lines of code and within seconds, we saw 541 printed on the screen.  A few lines of code had magically solved a problem which human brain wasn’t able to solve instantly. This small exercise had a huge impact on my career, though I didn’t understand the exact code back then, I knew this was something I would be interested in doing for a long span of my life. Thereafter I became very passionate about programming, I went well beyond the prescribed syllabus, learned different data structures, read numerous algorithms and started making different android, and web applications. At the end of my freshman year I was getting freelancing offers that usually a junior or senior year student would get. Some of my earlier work include a Wedding App, a friend’s location finder and real time polling web-app. I knew early development in programming could be very beneficial and thus started a coding society in college named ‘Code Junkies’. Here me and my friend taught algorithms and data structures. Our society was a success, we started with 40 students and by the end of the semester we had almost about 70 students. Even now when we have left college, our juniors approach us with problems.  In my second year, I enrolled in a course “self study”. One of the requirements of the course was a research project in any area of my choice. Searching about the current trends in computer science, I stumbled upon the world of Machine Learning.  A topic which has continued to fascinate and intrigue me since. My first foray into Machine Learning was an online course on Coursera by Prof. Andrew Ng. from Stanford. Machine Learning had elements of mathematics and algorithms, two areas for which I always had a keen inclination. Naturally, I took to this area like ‘fish to water’. 

For my undergraduate research project, I implemented it’s algorithms on some of my basic projects like facial expression detection and movie recommender systems. I presented both of them as minor projects in junior year and for both of the them was ranked in top ten projects of the batch. While working on recommender systems, I stumbled upon a paper entitled ‘Clustering using same-cluster queries’ which appeared in the proceedings of NIPS 2016. I had some questions and suggestions, so I contacted the authors Prof. Yaoliang Yu and Shrinu Kushagra of the University of Waterloo. After a few email exchanges, we started working on a small research problem. ‘Convergence properties of K-means with and without queries’. Given a set of data points, Clustering aims to partition them such that similar points are in the same group while simultaneously separating the dissimilar points. One popular clustering algorithm is called K-means clustering. Although widely used in practice, the algorithm rather surprisingly comes with very few theoretical guaranties. It is known that K-means algorithm can get stuck at a local minima. Under what conditions would k-means reach a global minima? On what datasets should k-means be applied? These are some important questions which do not have satisfactory answers in current literature. In this project, we tried to answer these questions. I performed certain experiments which showed that if data consists of well separated balls then with high probability  the k-means algorithm does not get stuck at a local minima. We complemented our experiments with theoretical guarantees which showed that this should always happen as long as the separation between the balls is at least four times the radius. This was my first experience of how graduate-level research looks like. This also got me further interested in the field of clustering. Thus, for my undergraduate research project I worked on a project “Clustering for categorical data” with Prof. O P Verma. Objects have attributes which are not always numerical, sometimes attributes have domain or categories to which they could belong to. Such data is called categorical data. To group such categorical data many clustering algorithms are used. The k-modes algorithm is a popular choice for clustering categorical data. For my undergraduate project, we have proposed a novel similarity-based distance (SBD) metric to find the distance between objects of categorical data. Our experiments showed that our proposed distance (SBD), when used with the SBC (space structure based clustering) type algorithm significantly outperforms the existing algorithms like k-modes or other SBC type algorithms when used on categorical datasets.

Machine Learning is a vast area with many sub-disciplines like supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. Each of these sub-disciplines can themselves be divided into further sub-fields. Moreover, the field is changing at an exponential rate. Many machine learning problems were considered hard a few years ago. A lot of these problems have not only been solved but human-level accuracy has been reached with only a few years of research effort. As an undergraduate student, I feel that I have barely scratched the surface in this area. The projects described in the previous paragraphs demonstrate my inclination as well as preparation to carry out graduate level research in ML. Broadly, I am interested in studying machine learning problems from an optimization perspective. Although NP-Hard is regularly applied in areas like clustering, deep learning and many others, non-convex optimization is something that particularly interests me. Understanding the convergence behavior, developing better optimization algorithms for highly non-convex models (like deep learning) is also something that interests me, quite a lot.
 CMU has been a dream university for me, having heard the innovations like, captcha and #Hashtag which changed the entire world, were developed there. It gives me goosebumps to even imagine being a part of the legacy created by faculty like Shafi Goldwasser and Edmund Clark, who have won Turing awards. If I am honored with a chance to be a part of this legacy, I would love to be a part of Auton Lab and Sailing Lab. Projects like massive data mining in Auton Lab and learning space structure in high dimensional space in Sailing lab aligns with my interest

group, having followed some of the very interesting research work in this group like approximate solution to N-P hard problems, that align with my interest. 

Since July 2018, I have been working with Samsung Research. My team ‘Remote Services’ focuses on remotely solving the problems faced by our millions of smart TV users. My current projects aim at selecting a few hundred TVs best suited for analysis from a large pool of “10 million” Smart TVs. Logs from this smaller pool is then compressed and sent to our server for further investigation. Being in the industry for the past few months, I've had the taste of corporate life, doing the work I love, amidst highly intellectual people. But somewhere I always knew my calling lies in comprehensive research and innovation.  
Hence as per the aforementioned points, I believe that I will be a good fit for the masters in ML programme at CMU, CMU will help further building my career as an Software Engineer and if given a chance, will be able to live my dream of studying at CMU as well as contribute proactively to the Research in AI+ club group. 



Besides my research and projects,one more thing that I have always tried to put my time and  effort into is giving my share of knowledge back to the society. Apart from teaching algorithms at Coding blocks and Code Junkies, I was also the Google facilitator for the year 2017-2018. I was appointed by Google India to conduct their applied CS program in my college. Google applied CS program was different than any other CS course. Here I had to teach different data structures through development of android application. Teaching college students is lot of fun and challenge, but I experienced the satisfaction of teachingBut the stint that gave me most satisfaction was working with Suryasanthan. It is a NGO that aims at empowering people who struggle to earn bread for their living. Here we helped people learn basic computer applications like MS Word, Excel so they could get a decent desk job.
